Course and Timetable Planner / c01w25-project-course-matrix

Course Matrix is a centralized platform and personal AI assistant designed to help UTSC undergraduate students efficiently manage their academic and non-academic life. It consolidates various platforms and information that students typically juggle across multiple websites into one accessible location. The platform provides up-to-date course information, tracks degress and course assignments/exams progresses and offers personalized scheduling assistance through an AI-powered chatbot. Students can access details about course prerequisite, exclusion and offerings, while also customizing their timetables to fit their unique needs.
The AI chatbot is particularly useful for making course recommendations based on indivuidual preferences, academic needs, degree requirements. It also helps students structure their days by suggesting time blocks for lectures, assignments, leisure and other activities, while factoring in crucial elements such as lecture locations, times and meeting schedules. Users can track their academic progress by keeping tabs on grades, assignment deadlines, upcoming exams. Information which the AI assistance could use to adjust their suggesstions. Additionally, the platform facilitates group coordination by enabling students to share timetables with peers, overlaying their time tables with other people's timetable or schedule such as office hour to better synchronie schedules for meetings. The platform will also features an email notification system to alert users about important academic and financial deadlines.

Course Matrix primarily aims at UTSC undergraduate students particularly those who may feel overwhelmed by managing multiple platforms and tools to organize their courses and academic life. This platform is especially beneficial for 1st year students who are new to the campus and unfamiliar with the logistic of course selection, timetable cooridination, academic requirements, offered facilities and its locations. It also aims to help International Student to plan ahead and full fill academic's and permits' requirements.

The primary value fo this product lies in its ability to save time, money and effort in maintaining a balance and economic life. Instead of navigating multiple websites and tools to find information, students can access everything they need in one place. The AI chatbot streamlines the source selection process, helping users quickly identify suitable course based on their preferences, academic needs which is expected to save student at least one week of organizing course works.
Additionally, course matrix provides a level of flexibility that many current systems lack. It allows users to customize their timetables, ensuring they can block out time for personal activities, study sessions, and other priorities. This platform allows students to have greater control over their schedules, factoring in travel time between classes and personal preferences. Thus reducing manual errors of scheduling or forgetting critical dates, which reduces the chances of being late to classes, exams while improving study profficiency. Course Matrix also helps students avoid critical mistakes, such as missing out on courses offered only once per year or scheduling classes far away too close together. By providing full access to the course database, the platform enables user to filter courses based on their completed prerequisite and degree requirment, highlighting courses with low frequency offering for prioritization, which eliminates the frustration of having to manually cross-check this information across different sources and ensures safe travel between locations. Additionally, the integration of meeting scheduling, proffessor and TA office hours, notifications makes it a one-stop solution for academic coordination.

A done product for Course Matrix will be a fully functional platform that delivers all the above-mentioned features. This includes a comprehensive course databse that is continuously updated with information regarding course offerings, prerequisites, exlcusions, schedules. An interactive chatbot that is responsive and able to provide accurate recommendations and custom and sharable timetable generation based on user input. The platform will aslso need to support the integration of personal schedules, such as meeting arrangements with professors, TA, study groups, alongside the academic calendar. Users should be able to see their full academic progress, including grades, deadlines, and any outstanding course requirements. Additionally, the system should provide timely email notifications about important deadline. On the technical side, the website should be intuitive to use, with a user-friendly interface that allows students to easily navigate through their degree requirements and course information. The AI chatbot must function effectively to reduce students' stress and workload by providing personalized and actionable advance.

The idea for Course Matrix came out of a common frustration that many students face when trying to organize their academic lives. During our team discuession, we identified key pain points that students, especially UTSC, experience each semester. Studentss often spend an inordinate amount of time trying to figure out which courses to take to meet their requirments. Not only is this process time-consuming, but it also filled with uncertainties such as not knowing which couurses will be available in upcoming terms, especially for Fall and Summer semesters.
International students face additional challenges, such as ensuring they have the right number of credits to meet full-time study requirments for their study permits and any prolonged or delay in the degree progress which significantly hurt them financially due to the expensive tuition and study permit extension fees. Furthermore, many students find it difficult to mange all the necessary adminstrative tasks, such as keeping track of course prerequisites, deadlines, and office hours. There was a clear need for a tool, a personal assistance, a companion who could could centralize all of this information and offer a personalized, easy-to-use solution.
Another issue that emerged during our discuessions was the stress associated with scheduling courses too tightly especially when students are unfamiliar with campus logistic and classroom locations. Some students end up with schedules that have little to no time to move between classes, which leads to stress, missed lectures and sometime even financial penalties for dropping courses too late. Our time recognized the need for a more intelligent solutiont that could account for these variables and provide students with an optimized timetable.

Given the wide range of academic resources at UTSC, we realized that building a platform to help students navigates the course database, schedule meetings and track academic progress in a more streamlined and automatic manner could address these challenges. When compared to other alternatives such as a sport app or ... we believe that this product will bring the most value to UTSC students.